Blues
When millions of Africans were transported to America as slaves in the 18th
and 19th centuries, their melodies and rhythms went with them. They knew 
that singing together made working easier, and it was in these work songs 
that African rhythms and melodies were preserved until slavery ended in
1865. Many African Americans became Christians and sang hymns in 
church. Others learned to play popular songs and dance tunes for money. But
whenever they sang and played, the African rhythms of the old work songs 
could be heard. And when they expressed their feelings by creating new 
songs, African melodies could be heard in the tunes.
It was this new combination of African and Western music that led to the 
genre we now call "blues". Some blues songs told stories of heartbreak and 
pain, and these were often slow and sad. But others were about being in love, 
or having fun, and these were up-tempo and good to dance to. Various blues 
styles developed over the years, some in small towns of the American south 
and others in cities like Chicago and New Orleans. But wherever the music 
was played, listeners heard a sound that was going to influence nearly every
genre of popular music to come, from jazz and soul to hip hop. If you'd like to 
hear some early blues, try searching for the recordings of Blind Willie McTell, 
Bukka White and Lightnin' Hopkins. For later blues, try Billie Holiday, Muddy 
Waters, Howlin' Wolf and John Lee Hooker.
Jazz
Most African American musicians only played blues, but some played 
classical music as well and learned European harmony. Some even mixed 
European harmony with the rhythms and scales of blues, and it was from this 
mixture that "jazz" was born. One of jazz's greatest musicians was the trumpet 
player Louis Armstrong, who helped to develop many styles of jazz. He was in 
New Orleans, his home town, in the 1910s when the marching-band style of 
New Orleans jazz (or "dixieland") was being born. In the 1920s he was in 
Chicago inventing new ways of improvising with Joe "King" Oliver and his 
band. Then he was in New York City in the 1930s when big band jazz 
and swing were developing. These new styles were played by jazz orchestras 
with a rhythm section (drums, double bass, piano and 
guitar), brass and woodwind sections, and sometimes strings and one or 
more singers. Swing was hugely popular in the 1940 s, becoming the music 
that nearly everyone danced to. Some of the greatest jazz orchestras were 
those led by Duke Ellington, Count Basie and Fletcher Henderson, with whom 
Louis Armstrong played. All the most popular singers of the day, like Bing 
Crosby, Frank Sinatra and Nat King Cole, sang with jazz orchestras.
But by the 1950s many young musicians no longer wanted to play in jazz 
orchestras. They wanted the freedom to improvise and began experimenting 
in their own bands. Before long they were playing exciting new styles 
like bebop and modal jazz. These new styles weren't as easy to dance to as 
swing, so they weren't as popular, but they found a new audience of serious 
listeners for whom modern jazz was art music rather than popular music. The
best of these musicians included Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk, John 
Coltrane, Miles Davis and Charles Mingus.
Rhythm and Blues
As jazz was becoming more and more popular in the 1930s and 1940 s, 
another new genre was starting to develop. Many African Americans were 
professional blues musicians, but making money wasn't easy. They formed 
small bands and looked for work in cheap bars and clubs. But to get work, 
they had to attract audiences. Most young people who went to these places 
thought blues was old-fashioned, so the bands had to develop a new style, 
and what they created was "rhythm and blues" (or R&B*).The early forms of 
R&B were loud and lively and mostly played on drums, double bass, and 
electric guitar. Singers were men or women with big voices, and audiences 
loved it. The style quickly spread throughout the country, with larger bands 
adding piano, trumpet and saxophone. R&B was great fun and perfect for 
dancing, and by the mid-1940s many bands were selling records. Two of the 
biggest sellers were T-Bone Walker and Louis Jordan's "Tympany Five", who 
had a number-one hit in 1944 with G.I. Jive. Later R&B artists include Ruth 
Brown, Bo Diddley, Muddy Waters and Ray Charles.
Rock and Roll
By the early 1950 s, another new genre called "rock and roll" (or "rock'n'roll") 
was being created by musicians who could play both R&B and Western 
Swing, a popular style of country dance music. This new music was played on 
the same set of instruments as R&B - electric guitar, double bass and drums – 
with the guitarist often singing as well. It had a strong blues beat and an R&B 
feel, but the melodies were like those of country music. It was great to dance 
to, and rock and roll dance styles soon developed as well. The lyrics were fun 
to listen to, and it quickly became popular, especially when teenagers heard 
rock and roll records on the radio.
One of the first bands to record was "Bill Hayley and His Comets" who had a 
hit single with Rock around the Clock in 1954. They were greatly influenced 
by R&B artists like Louis Jordan and Big Joe Turner, as were many others like 
Little Richard and Chuck Berry, whose 1956 single Roll Over 
Beethoven became a huge hit. Jerry Lee Lewis, who amazed audiences with 
his wild piano playing, also became very popular.
But rock and roll seemed wild and dangerous to many parents, especially 
when they saw the sexy dancing of a handsome young singer named Elvis 
Presley. There was nothing they could do to stop their kids from loving rock 
and roll and being fans of Elvis, however. He became hugely successful and 
made rock and roll one of the most popular styles of music not only in 
America, but across the world. Elvis had many hit singles, including Hound 
Dog, Heartbreak Hotel and Jailhouse Rock, and he soon became known as 
"the king of rock and roll" or simply "the king".
The 1960s
In the early 60s a new genre called Rock Music began to develop when 
young musicians combined the rock and roll of artists like Elvis with elements 
of R&B. New styles of Country Music also became popular in the 60s, as did 
a new style of melodic R&B called Soul Music. Later in the 60s soul artists 
like James Brown developed a more rhythmic style called funk, and funk led 
to many new styles of Dance Music in the 70s, the 80s and beyond. In the 
late 70s a new genre called Hip Hop also developed. Hip hop is now one of 
the most popular styles of music in the world, and like all major genres of 
popular music it’s produced many hit singles on the Pop Music charts.

